General Atomics Aeronautical - MQ-9A Block 1 / Block 5
MQ-9A "Reaper"
Persistent Multi-Mission ISR
 

The turboprop-powered, multi-mission MQ-9A Remotely Piloted Aircraft (RPA) was developed with GA-ASI funding and first flown in 2001. MQ-9A "Reaper" is a highly sophisticated development built on the experience gained with the company's battle-proven Predator RPA and is a major evolutionary leap forward in overall performance and reliability. MQ-9A was designated "Reaper" by the U.S. and Royal Air Force, but has become the widely used name for any Predator B equipped with weapons.

Featuring unmatched operational flexibility, MQ-9A has an endurance of over 27 hours, speeds of 240 KTAS, can operate up to 50,000 feet, and has a 3,850 pound (1746 kilogram) payload capacity that includes 3,000 pounds (1361 kilograms) of external stores. The aircraft carries 500% more payload and has nine times the horsepower. It provides a long-endurance, persistent surveillance/strike capability for the war fighter.

An extremely reliable aircraft, MQ-9A is equipped with a fault-tolerant flight control system and triple redundant avionics system architecture. It is engineered to meet and exceed manned aircraft reliability standards.

MQ-9A is powered by the flight-certified and proven Honeywell TPE331-10 turboprop engine, integrated with Digital Electronic Engine Control (DEEC), which significantly improves engine performance and fuel efficiency, particularly at low altitudes.

The aircraft is highly modular and is configured easily with a variety of payloads to meet mission requirements. MQ-9A is capable of carrying multiple mission payloads to include: Electro-optical/Infrared (EO/IR), Lynx® Multi-mode Radar, multi-mode maritime surveillance radar, Electronic Support Measures (ESM), laser designators, and various weapons and payload packages.

MQ-9A continues to improve and evolve, making it more relevant for its customers' emerging needs. The MQ-9A Extended Range (ER) was designed with field-retrofittable capabilities such as wing-borne fuel pods and a new reinforced landing gear that extends the aircraft's already impressive endurance from 27 hours to 34 hours, while further increasing its operational flexibility. To date, the MQ-9A has been acquired by the U.S. Air Force, U.S. Department of Homeland Security, NASA, the Royal Air Force, the Italian Air Force, the French Air Force and the Spanish Air Force.

General Atomics Aeronautical - MQ-9B SkyGuardian
MQ-9B SeaGuardian®
Persistent Maritime Domain Awareness
MQ-9B SeaGuardian® is the maritime-focused sibling of the revolutionary SkyGuardian® remotely piloted aircraft system (RPAS) that has been missionized using “bolt-on/bolt-off” maritime sensors. SeaGuardian is designed to fly over the horizon via satellite for over 30 hours (depending on configuration) in all types of weather and safely integrate into civil airspace, enabling joint forces and civil authorities to deliver real-time situational awareness anywhere in the maritime domain—day or night. This highly versatile maritime patrol and reconnaissance aircraft can seamlessly integrate a centerline wide-area maritime radar, an automatic identification system, electronic support measures, and a self-contained anti-submarine warfare (ASW) mission kit. SeaGuardian not only integrates the most advanced maritime intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR) capabilities, but it is also the first RPAS in its class to enable real-time search and patrol above and below the ocean’s surface.

SeaGuardian can be configured to conduct a number of maritime ISR operations, including but not limited to:

Humanitarian Assistance/Disaster Relief
Search and Rescue
Law Enforcement
Anti-Surface Warfare
Anti-Submarine Warfare
Airborne Mine Counter Measures
Long-Range Strategic ISR
Over-the-Horizon Targeting
Anti-Submarine Warfare
Leveraging MQ-9B’s open architecture system, SeaGuardian operators have the option to integrate our ground-breaking sonobuoy management and control system (SMCS) and sonobuoy dispenser system (SDS). Together, these systems allow SeaGuardian operators to deploy, monitor and control sonobuoys from a single RPAS. Also, SeaGuardian has four wing stations available to carry up to 4 SDS pods, enabling it to hold and dispense up to 40 ‘A’ size or 80 ‘G’ size sonobuoys and remotely perform ASW anywhere in the world. In its standard maritime ISR and ASW configuration, SeaGuardian’s range encompasses a mission radius of 1200 nautical miles with significant on-station time for submarine prosecution, providing a low-cost, stand-alone capability or a complement to human-crewed aircraft for manned-unmanned teaming operations.


MQ-9B SeaGuardian Data Sheet
 MQ-9B SeaGuardian Data Sheet
World’s First Type-Certifiable RPAS
As an MQ-9B RPAS, SeaGuardian is designed from the ground up to not only meet NATO standards (STANAG 4671) but also to comply with civil airspace requirements in the U.S. and around the world. Using GA-ASI's first-of-its-kind Detect and Avoid System and Certifiable Ground Control Station, SeaGuardian seamlessly integrates with normal air traffic just like other commercial aircraft. SeaGuardian’s remote flight station gives operators a similar, if not better, air traffic picture than the cockpit of human-crewed aircraft. Over the years, GA-ASI has been working very closely with the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration and the UK Civil Aviation Authority to approve MQ-9B for flight in civil airspace.

CAPTION
MQ-9B SeaGuardian®: Redefining Maritime Domain Operations
The MQ-9B SeaGuardian® unmanned aircraft system (UAS) is tailor-made to support the U.S. Navy, Marine Corps, and their allies and partners around the world against peer or near-peer forces.


General Atomics Aeronautical Systems Inc.
General Atomics Aeronautical Systems
About
Products & Services
News & Media
Suppliers
Careers
Contact
General Atomics Aeronautical - MQ-9B SkyGuardian
MQ-9B SkyGuardian®
Unmatched Situational Awareness
MQ-9B SkyGuardian® is the next generation of remotely piloted aircraft systems (RPAS), delivering persistent intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR) around the globe. SkyGuardian is designed to fly over the horizon via satellite for up to 40+ hours in all types of weather and safely integrate into civil airspace, enabling joint forces and civil authorities to deliver real-time situational awareness anywhere in the world—day or night. The aircraft is outfitted with the revolutionary Lynx Multi-mode Radar, an advanced electro-optical/infrared (EO/IR) sensor, automatic takeoff and landing, and features a longer wingspan than its predecessors at 79 ft (24m). In addition to its industry-leading endurance and superior surveillance capabilities, SkyGuardian seamlessly integrates with its users' other platforms, systems, and podded technologies, dramatically expanding the platform's multi-domain mission sets.

SkyGuardian can be configured to conduct a number of ISR operations, including but not limited to:

Humanitarian Assistance/Disaster Relief
Search and Rescue
Law Enforcement
Border Enforcement
Defensive Counter Air
Airborne Early Warning
Electronic Warfare
Anti-Surface Warfare (SeaGuardian mission kit)
Anti-Submarine Warfare (SeaGuardian mission kit)
Airborne Mine Counter Measures (SeaGuardian mission kit)
Long-Range Strategic ISR
Over-the-Horizon Targeting
Open Architecture Design
SkyGuardian is derived from a family of systems that has achieved over 8 million flight hours over the past decade, supporting operations around the globe, from the battlefield to environmental and humanitarian efforts. Drawing on this experience, SkyGuardian provides enhanced payload capacity and an open architecture system that enables the aircraft to integrate the most advanced sensor payloads for intelligence gathering, survivability, and even kinetic payloads for more complex operational environments. SkyGuardian features nine hardpoints (8 wing, 1 centerline) with a max 4750 lb (2155 kg) external payload capacity. This enables armed forces and governments to easily integrate sovereign payloads and mission systems for their own uniquely tailored solutions.

MQ-9B SkyGuardian Data Sheet
 MQ-9B SkyGuardian Data Sheet
World's First Type-Certifiable RPAS
As an MQ-9B RPAS, SkyGuardian is designed from the ground up to not only meet NATO standards (STANAG 4671) but also to comply with civil airspace requirements in the U.S. and around the world. Using GA-ASI's first-of-its-kind Detect and Avoid System and Certifiable Ground Control Station, SkyGuardian seamlessly integrates with normal air traffic just like other commercial aircraft. SkyGuardian's remote flight station gives operators a similar, if not better, air traffic picture than the cockpit of human-crewed aircraft. Over the years, GA-ASI has been working very closely with the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration and the UK Civil Aviation Authority to approve MQ-9B for flight in civil airspace.

The UK's Royal Air Force is currently leading the way and will be the first force to operate this aircraft under their own designation, Protector RG Mk1.
